arXiv:1903.12264v1 [cs.CY] 20 Mar 2019

Validation of a recommender system for prompting omitted
foods in online dietary assessment surveys
Timur Osadchiy

Ivan Poliakov

Patrick Olivier

t.osadchiy@newcastle.ac.uk
Open Lab, School of Computing,
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom

ivan.poliakov@newcastle.ac.uk
Open Lab, School of Computing,
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom

patrick.olivier@monash.edu
Community Org & Social Informatics,
Monash University
Melbourne, Australia

Maisie Rowland

Emma Foster

maisie.rowland@newcastle.ac.uk
Institute of Health and Society,
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom

emma.foster@newcastle.ac.uk
Institute of Health and Society,
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom

ABSTRACT
Recall assistance methods are among the key aspects that improve
the accuracy of online dietary assessment surveys. These methods still mainly rely on experience of trained interviewers with
nutritional background, but data driven approaches could improve
cost-efficiency and scalability of automated dietary assessment. We
evaluated the effectiveness of a recommender algorithm developed
for an online dietary assessment system called Intake24, that automates the multiple-pass 24-hour recall method. The recommender
builds a model of eating behavior from recalls collected in past
surveys. Based on foods they have already selected, the model is
used to remind respondents of associated foods that they may have
omitted to report. The performance of prompts generated by the
model was compared to that of prompts hand-coded by nutritionists in two dietary studies. The results of our studies demonstrate
that the recommender system is able to capture a higher number
of foods omitted by respondents of online dietary surveys than
prompts hand-coded by nutritionists. However, the considerably
lower precision of generated prompts indicates an opportunity for
further improvement of the system.

KEYWORDS
Dietary assessment, Healthcare technology, Usability, Recommender
Systems

1

INTRODUCTION

Dietary assessment is a pivotal part of healthcare systems. Accurately capturing dietary habits and measuring intake is essential
for analyzing the role of diet in causing and preventing a range
of chronic diseases including diabetes, cardiovascular disease and
cancers. The reliability of assessment methods directly affects the
accuracy of targeting of public health policies and interventions.
The use of conventional in-depth interviewer-led surveys that heavily rely on labor of nutritionists and dietitians fails to scale and keep
up with a rapidly increasing population. This has resulted in an
ongoing endeavor of various research teams to computerize paperbased dietary assessment tools (e.g. food frequency questionnaires

and 24-hour recalls) [9, 31, 32]. Such instruments equip dietary
assessment with flexibility, wider coverage and remote collection
of responses.
Unfortunately, automated dietary assessment methods, as their
interviewer-led paper-based predecessors, are heavily dependent
on memory of a respondent and prone to omissions. Respondents
may skip reporting associated foods (e.g. milk in coffee/tea, butter on toast) due to forgetting them, insufficient training or their
impression that reporting those details is not important. Some respondents may also choose to alter their intake or leave out certain
foods (e.g. fast food, alcohol) to avoid social desirability bias [30].
Social desirability bias is the tendency of an individual to report
an answer in a way that will be viewed favorably by others (i.e.
socially acceptable) [15]. Such omissions can be identified and minimized by a trained interviewer who can inquire for more details
when needed. Thus, to generate reliable and accurate results an
intelligent dietary assessment system has to emulate this behavior
of an interviewer and adapt to the diet of an individual. That system
could apply data driven approaches, such as approaches used in
recommendation systems, to previous responses of respondents to
learn about their eating habits and provide appropriate cues for the
memory of interviewees.
Recommender systems are widely used in various domains for inferring user preferences, from entertainment to online retail [10, 20].
For example, recommender systems in online shops analyze users’
purchasing histories and behavior to suggest items relevant for
specific needs of an individual [20]. Similarly, a dietary assessment
system can use data driven methods to learn about the eating behavior of respondents and prompt them in relation to foods they
have potentially eaten but omitted when recalling their dietary
intake.
In our previous work we developed a recommender system based
on pairwise association rules that aids respondent’s recall [25]. The
main contribution of this paper is an evaluation of the recommender
system in online dietary assessment surveys, in real-life settings.
Further, we provide the background of systems for conducting
online dietary assessment surveys. We review the development of

a recommender algorithm for one of such systems. We then report
and discuss the design and results of two dietary surveys, in order
to compare the efficiency of the recommender to that of prompts
added by nutritionists.

2 PREVIOUS WORK
2.1 Challenges in dietary assessment

all foods and drinks consumed by an individual for a previous day
[14]. Capturing habitual intake using this method requires multiple
non-consequent interviews to be conducted over a long period of
time (e.g. weeks, months). The estimation of energy intake with this
method is relatively accurate when validated with doubly labeled
water [23]. However, similarly to the FFQ, it is also prone to underreporting due its reliance on subjects self-reporting their intake
[33].

Dietary assessment methods can be broadly split into three categories: nutrient biomarkers, objective (i.e. direct observations) and
subjective (i.e. self-reported intake by subjects) [30, 36]. Biomarkers
can be used to estimate intake of some nutrients (e.g. fatty acids)
and energy [4, 5]. Previous research has demonstrated a number
of advantages of biomarkers, including high accuracy, the lack of
social desirability bias and an independence from a subject’s ability
to self-report their intake [26]. Nevertheless, for most nutritional
biomarkers, this method imposes a number of practical and economical challenges including the need to collect, store and analyze
blood, urine or other biological specimens [33]. Biomarkers are
still highly useful in calibrating measurement errors in dietary reports. For example, doubly labeled water is widely considered as a
gold standard that other dietary assessment methods are compared
with [5, 8, 22]. Another approach to collecting data for dietary
assessment involves skilled research staff directly observing and
recording a subject’s intake [30]. Records are collected in a subject’s home environment and include not only information about
food consumption but also preparation methods. This method is
especially useful in developing countries, with subjects with a low
literacy rate or where food is prepared in large quantities for a
group (e.g. family). However, direct observations are somewhat
impractical on larger scale populations.
Subjective dietary assessment methods, based on intake selfreported by subjects, includes weighted food diary method, food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) and 24-hour recall [30]. The weighted
food diary method requires subjects to weigh portion sizes and
record their intake after every eating occasion. To collect accurate
records this method requires subjects to undertake training before
taking part in a study. Thus, the weighted food diary requires a high
level of motivation and poses a relatively large burden on subjects
[24]. The method is known to change diets of subjects taking part
in a study, which limits the accuracy of results [27]. Meanwhile,
the FFQ enables capturing of an individual’s intake over a long
period of time (e.g. a month of a year) in a relatively simple, costand time- efficient manner [30, 33]. FFQ is an advanced form of a
checklist that normally contains 100-150 foods and asks a subject to
report which of those foods they have eaten over a specific period,
and how much [30]. Answers for the questionnaire can be both
collected through an interview or via a self-administered approach
(e.g. online survey). In contrast to the weighted food diary the FFQ
poses a lower subject burden [33]. The accuracy of this method,
however, is relatively low as it relies on the ability of subjects to
remember their diet over a long period of time and thus, is prone
to misreporting [18, 33].
One of the most widely adopted approaches is the multiple-pass
24-hour recall, which is considered to offer a more favorable balance
of high accuracy and low subject burden [16]. 24-hour recall was
designed as an interviewer-led method to collect information about

The involvement of skilled professionals in the collection and analysis of complex dietary data has both economic implications and
implications for scalability. To address these issues a number of
systems have been developed that replace an interviewer in the 24hour recall method with an online survey [9, 31, 32]. For researchers,
such systems provide tools to administer surveys and collect dietary
records from participants with a detailed breakdown of the foods
and drinks consumed, to enable the estimation of energy intake and
intakes of macro- and micro-nutrients. Respondents are asked to
go through a survey in a form of a web-based interface and record
their dietary intake for the previous day. The survey comprises a
series of questions about each meal and all its constituent foods and
drinks. The collected information includes names of foods/drinks
and their portion sizes. Portion sizes are self-estimated by a respondent using validated photographs of weighted servings of foods
[12]. Each respondent normally records their meals for the previous
day on three separate occasions. A single day (i.e. recall submission)
typically consists of four to seven meals (e.g. breakfast, morning
snack, lunch, evening meal etc.). Each reported meal may include a
selection of foods, drinks, desserts, condiments and such (referred
to generically as foods).
Participants commonly omit foods and under-estimate portion
sizes in dietary assessment surveys due to a range of human factors including poor human memory or lack of attention [24, 33].
A study of 83 adults between 20 and 60 years old demonstrated
that interviewer-led 24-hour recall underestimated energy intake
on average by 33% of that measured with doubly labeled water
[23]. Various state-of-the-art techniques have been proposed by the
research community to aid respondents’ self-reported intake recall
and minimize under-estimation. For example, images of food captured by respondents using handheld devices or wearable cameras
can enhance the quality of self-reported dietary surveys by revealing unreported foods and misreporting errors [3, 13]. In addition
to that, image recognition algorithms applied to those images may
facilitate the accuracy of energy and portion size estimation [21, 35].
Another direction for improving the accuracy of dietary assessment
is monitoring eating bahaviour using wearable devices and sensors
embedded into the environment [17]. However, probably the most
widely adopted method of reminding respondents about omitted
foods in online dietary assessment surveys are associated food questions [6, 32]. Associated food questions are questions about foods
that are commonly consumed together. Normally each associated
food question is manually recorded into the system’s database by
a nutritionist or a dietitian along with a corresponding relation
between an antecedent food (e.g. white bread, toast) and a consequent food (e.g. butter) [25]. The system returns an associated food

2.2

2

Online dietary assessment surveys

prompt once a respondent reports an antecedent food. However,
identifying relations for thousands of foods stored in the system
seems impractical. Moreover, even an experienced nutritionist may
not always be able to identify all the factors and aspects of a diet of
a specific population.

2.3

the user yet are used as recommendations. The list of recommended
foods is sorted by their likelihood of being observed in a meal having
observed the reported foods in descending order. In other words,
the algorithm recommends foods that are more likely to be observed
with any of reported foods in pairs.
The likelihood for a recommended food f is calculated as R f =
C f × Wf , where C f is the aggregation of conditional probabilities
of observing that food in a pair with one of the reported foods fi in
a meal having observed that reported food; and Wf is the weight of
ÍN count (f , fi )
the aggregation. C f is calculated as C f = i=0
, where
count (f i )
N is the number of reported foods, count(f , fi ) is the number of
meals in the dataset that contain the pair (f , fi ) and count(fi ) is
the number of meals in the dataset that contain the reported food
ÍK
fi individually. Wf is calculated as Wf = i=0
count(fi ), where K
is the number of reported foods fi , for which a pair containing
the recommended food f being considered has been found. Thus,
the reported foods that were previously observed with the recommended food and that were reported more often in the dataset give
a higher weight to the recommendation.
Previously we analyzed the performance and demonstrated the
effectiveness of the recommender system over food associations
hand-coded by nutritionists in a simulation of respondents omitting
foods with data collected from past real-life dietary surveys [25].
In this paper we deploy and compare the recommender system to
the hand-coded food associations in conditions of two real dietary
surveys.

Recommender system

Eating habits depend on a range of factors, including region, culture and a specific diet, which makes them hard to predict. Thus,
manual extraction of associated food questions and keeping them
up-to-date is prone to omissions and is a time-consuming task.
Those challenges motivated us to develop a recommender system
that extracts food associations in an automated manner [25]. The
recommender algorithm was developed for Intake24, open-source
dietary assessment system for conducting large-scale population
24-hour multiple-pass recall surveys online [31].
While developing the recommender system we considered a few
existing approaches such as collaborative filtering. Collaborative
filtering is, for example, used in online retail websites including
Amazon, to recommend products that customers might want to
buy based on their purchase history [20]. This approach requires
a system of ratings, so customers can express their attitude to
products. The system then uses collaborative filtering to build a
model of user preferences based on ratings that users assign to
products. That model can then produce recommendations based on
similarity between users or products in terms of their preferences
and correlations in ratings. However, in online dietary assessment
surveys respondents will likely only ever use the system if they are
a part of a study and only for a short period of time. Therefore, it is
unlikely that the system will aggregate personal behavioral profiles
rich enough for applying collaborative filtering or a similar method,
which is referred as the cold-start-problem [19]. For that reason, for
the implementation of the associated foods recommender system
we looked into other methods that are independent of personal user
profiles. Instead, we selected a method which built a model of eating
behavior of a population [25]. The model is then used to generate
prompts based on foods selected by an individual during their
recall. In our previous paper we considered three approaches to the
development of the recommender system based on: (i) association
rules [11], (ii) implicit social graph [28] and (iii) pairwise association
rules [25]. We compared the three versions of the recommender
system in an evaluation on a large data set of real dietary recalls
[25]. The evaluation has demonstrated that the implementation
based on pairwise association rules performs better for the defined
task [25].
To build a model of eating behavior the recommender system
based on pairwise association rules takes a dataset of all meals
reported by a given population, where a meal is a group of foods
(e.g. egg, toast, butter, cheese, orange juice) reported in a single
intake. Each meal is split into unique pairs of foods (e.g. toast and
butter, toast and cheese, toast and orange juice, etc.). For every pair
the resulting model stores the number of meals that contain this
pair. The model also stores the number of meals that contain each
individual food. To produce a recommendation the algorithm takes
foods reported by the current user to find pairs that contain those
foods. Foods from the filtered pairs that have not been reported by

3 METHODS
3.1 Interface design
The existing associated food prompts that are based on links between two foods manually added into Intake24 are returned immediately after one of the foods has been reported (Fig. 1). So, a
respondent is typically prompted with multiple foods while reporting a single meal. In contrast to that, recommendations produced
by the recommender system are based on a selection of foods and
have a form of a list. For that reason, we designed a screen with
generated food prompts in the form of a checkbox list that is returned at the end of reporting each meal (Fig. 2). A respondent can
accept multiple foods as with the hand-coded prompts. A list of
recommendations is limited to 15 foods, which is a slightly larger
number than the number of search results displayed to most users
by online search websites [7, 34].

Figure 1: Hand-coded associated food prompt in Intake24.

3

The study was conducted over a three-week period with a separate group of participants in each week. We asked participants
to record their intake for five consecutive days from Monday to
Friday. Every morning participants received automated email and
SMS reminders to log onto Intake24 and report the meals they had
for the previous day. Participants were asked not to record their
meals elsewhere (e.g. notepads) to aid their recalls. During the first
three days (Monday - Wednesday) the system presented one type of
associated food prompts and in the remaining two days (Thursday
- Friday) the other type of prompts. We presented hand-coded food
prompts in the first three days to n = 19 participants. For n = 30
participants we presented hand-coded food prompts in the last two
days. Monday recall submissions were used as an introduction to
minimize the learning effect by familiarizing participants with the
system’s interface and the 24-recall procedure. Those recalls were
discarded during the analysis of the results and only diet recalls of
work days (Monday - Thursday) were used.
3.2.2 Second study. The second study was collected during the
Newcastle Can campaign that aims to help to reduce obesity levels
in the North East of UK [1]. The campaign used various methods to
motivate its participants to improve their diets. One of the methods
involved participants recording their meals for a previous day using
Intake24 to receive feedback on their diet and links to NHS web
pages with more information about healthy eating.
To access Intake24, participants had to first click a corresponding
button in their Newcastle Can personal profile page. Before they
were redirected to Intake24 a modal window was displayed informing participants that they are transferred to an external website
and by proceeding they accept the privacy policy of Intake24. The
privacy policy informs a reader that anonymized and aggregated
information may be subject to processing for scientific purposes
and used as a basis for publications. All the recalls from Newcastle
Can users were anonymous and did not contain any personally
identifiable information.
Compared to the first study, the second did not pose any specific
requirements to the time of a day or days of the week, when participants needed to record their intake. The study did not require
respondents to use any specific device or to submit a certain number
of recalls either. In this study we collected recalls with hand-coded
prompts for a week and recalls with generated prompts for another
week. The second study attracted n = 91 respondents to complete
at least one recall, of whom n = 77 were women and n = 14 were
men. The age of participants in this study ranged from 18 to 82
years.

Figure 2: Generated associated food prompt in Intake24.

3.2

Recruitment and procedure

3.2.1 First study. To recruit participants for the first study we disseminated an advertisement describing the purpose of the study
and a web form to register interest via the University internal email
system. Individuals had to complete the web form to volunteer for
the study and were asked to circulate the invitation to their relatives
and friends for participation. The first page of the registration form
presented more details about the study and an informed consent
form, where all conditions had to be accepted to be able to register.
As part of the registration process we asked potential participants
to provide their contact details (e.g. name, email, phone number and
an age range). This study aimed to follow the original procedure
that was used in previous validations of Intake24 [6, 29] and asked
participants to record their intake in the morning. To help respondents to follow the procedure we queried their preferred morning
times to receive reminders about completing a dietary recall. To be
able to take part in this study individuals had to be over 18 years old,
speak English, have a diet that is common for the UK. To minimize
the likelihood of variations in diets of respondents affecting the
results of the study we informed them that it is important to avoid
changing their diet during the study. We assume that completing a
survey may have a different complexity across devices with various
screen sizes and input methods (e.g. touch interface, keyboard). For
that reason we encouraged respondents to use the same device to
record their intake during the study. Participants were informed
that they can withdraw from the study at any time. For completing five dietary recalls in five days participants were offered a £30
Amazon voucher. Recruitment resulted in 50 participants, of whom
n = 26 were men and n = 24 were women. One participant chose to
withdraw during the study. The participant’s ages ranged between
18 and 64 years.

3.3

Statistical analysis

We measure the proportion of recalls with generated and handcoded food prompts, where respondents accepted at least one food.
We also analyze the mean number of foods accepted per recall
in these two settings. In addition, we measure precision of food
prompts, that is the number of accepted foods divided by the number of returned foods. Many participants who reject associated food
prompts that are still relevant for other participants genuinely believe that they reported all foods. For example, although someone
may drink coffee without milk and sugar, a food prompt querying
about milk and sugar in a coffee is still relevant for many. For that
4

reason, we analyze the mean number of accepted foods only for
recalls, where at least one prompted food was accepted. We compare the coverage of two types of prompts through the number of
unique foods that were returned and accepted. We also compare
the estimates of energy reported with two types of prompts. We
exclude recall submissions with abnormally low-calorie content
from the analysis (below 250 kcal for the whole day). To detect
potential changes in usability of the survey interface we compare
the mean duration of recalls, i.e. time it took respondents to complete a survey. We assume that longer recalls may indicate that
food prompts generated by the recommender system negatively
affected the usability of the interface. Previous research shows that
participants complete their recalls using Intake24 in 16 minutes on
average [29]. For that reason, while analyzing the mean duration
of recalls we ignore those that took longer than 60 minutes, since
that could indicate that respondents took a break while completing
their recall. To analyze the significance between two given means
we use Mann-Whitney U test.

3.4

Figure 3: Distribution of accepted foods per recall during the
first survey.

Results

The first study resulted in 96 submitted recalls with hand-coded
and 97 with model-generated food prompts. In the survey with
hand-coded prompts 69% of respondents used a desktop computer,
30% used a mobile device, and 1% used a tablet. In the survey with
generated prompts, 69% of respondents used a desktop computer,
28% used a mobile device, and 3% used a tablet. Hand-coded food
prompts were displayed at least once in 86 recalls and accepted
in 57 recalls (66%). Generated prompts were returned in 97 recalls
at least once and accepted in 61 recalls (63%). For the hand-coded
prompts that is 1.1 accepted food per recalls on average, whereas
for the generated prompts that is 2.3 foods, which is significantly
higher (P < 0.001). Precision of the hand-coded and generated food
prompts for the first study are 24% and 2% respectively.
Participants in the second study submitted 133 recalls with handcoded and 119 with model-generated food prompts, of which 41
(31%) and 57 (48%) recalls respectively were submitted between
Saturday morning and Monday night. Intake records assisted by the
hand-coded prompts were submitted on average between 1:20pm
and 9pm. Similarly, recalls assisted by the generated prompts were
submitted on between 1:25pm and 8:30pm. In surveys with handcoded prompts, 37% of respondents used a mobile device, 33% used
a desktop, and 30% used a tablet. In surveys with generated prompts,
50% of respondents used a mobile device, 22% used a desktop, and
28% used a tablet. Hand-coded food prompts were displayed at
least once in 122 recalls and accepted in 61 recalls (50%). Generated
prompts were returned in 115 recalls and accepted in 83 recalls
(72%). As in the first study, there is a significant difference between
the mean acceptance rates. Participants on average accepted 1.5
foods per recall from hand-coded prompts and 2.1 from generated
prompts (P = 0.002). Precision of the hand-coded and generated
food prompts for the second study are 16% and 2% respectively.
Histograms of acceptance rates for both types of prompts in two
studies are provided in Fig. 3, 4.
In the first and the second studies with hand-coded prompts
the number of unique foods accepted by participants was 15 (9%)
and 16 (9%) out of 164 and 186 unique reported foods respectively

Figure 4: Distribution of accepted foods per recall during the
second survey.

(Fig. 5, 6). In surveys with generated prompts, this number was
found to be at least twice as high with 30 (18%) and 35 (19%) out of
165 and 189 unique reported foods (Fig. 5, 6).
We found no significant difference between the mean energy
reported in recalls with hand-coded food prompts (1911.8 kcal)
and generated food prompts (1790.6 kcal) during the first survey
(P = 0.159). However, the effect was observed during the second
survey, where the mean reported energy for hand-coded prompts
was 1461.7 kcal and 1545.7 kcal for generated prompts (P = 0.02).
While examining the mean duration of recalls, 7 (4%) recalls
were excluded from the first survey and 15 (6%) from the second
survey because these were longer than 60 minutes. We observed no
significant differences in the duration of recalls in either survey. The
mean duration of recalls during the first survey was 15.9 minutes
for recalls with hand-coded prompts and 13.3 minutes for recalls
with generated prompts (P = 0.108). During the second survey the
mean duration of recalls was 15.9 and 16.3 minutes respectively (P
= 0.297).
5

Figure 6: Frequency of accepted foods during the second survey.

Figure 5: Frequency of accepted foods during the first second
survey.

4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Principal findings

which could explain even lower energy estimates. At the same time,
participants of the second study reported higher energy intake in
recalls assisted by generated food prompts, which may indicate an
improved accuracy of assessment.
Meanwhile, generated food prompts have shown significantly
lower precision compared to that of hand-coded prompts. This is
due to a much longer list of recommendations produced by the
system. As it is observed in this study, only 30 and 35 unique foods
that had been recommended by the system were accepted across
all recalls in the first and second surveys. This is in agreement
with previous studies that some foods are more likely to be omitted
[6]. This also explains a considerably higher performance of the
recommender in a simulation we conducted in the previous study,
where we assumed that any food can be omitted [25]. To shorten
the list of recommendations, we plan to incorporate the acceptance
rate of recommended foods into the recommender system. This
will potentially allow us to place foods that are more likely to be
forgotten higher up the list of recommendations.

The results show that associated food prompts generated by the
recommender system based on pairwise association rules have
been demonstrated to be an effective and scalable alternative to
prompts hand-coded by nutritionists in online dietary assessment
surveys. This supports findings from our previous research [25]. In
the meantime, according to the recommendations from the NHS
UK a man needs around 2,500 kcal a day to maintain his weight
given a healthy and a balanced diet [2]. For a woman, that figure
is around 2,000 kcal a day. Compared to that, the mean energy
intake estimated in the first study during the current research is
considerably low, which suggests that there were cases of omissions and under-estimation. This is in agreement with previous
research that found Intake24 to underestimate energy intake by
1% on average compared to the interviewer-led recall [6]; and that
the interviewer-led recall underestimates energy intake by 33% on
average compared to that measured with doubly-labeled water [23].
The second study was conducted as part of a weight loss campaign,
6

The mean time it took respondents to complete a survey remained similar for generated and hand-coded prompts. The observed proportion of desktop and touch devices used in recalls
assisted with hand-coded and generated prompts is comparable
in both studies. In the first study, respondents submitted their recalls in the morning. In the second study, time of the day when
respondents recorded their intake is similar in both conditions.
Thus, relatively stable duration of recalls assisted with hand-coded
and generated prompts may indicate that the usability of the system
was not affected by the longer list of generated food prompts.
We should note that two types of prompts have a different presentation format. Hand-coded prompts are presented as questions
that can be accepted or rejected by a respondent during reporting
a meal. Generated prompts are presented in a form of a list after
the meal has been reported. Thus, the observed greater number of
accepted food items from the the recommender system may be an
effect of the presentation format rather than an effect of the better
fit of the suggested food items. In addition to that, the recommender
system was trained on data collected in the past surveys, where
hand-coded associated food prompts were used. Therefore, there
is a chance that would there be no hand-coded prompts, respondents might have reported some foods associations less often or not
reported them at all. Hence, the recommender system potentially
would not pick those associations from the data in the training
process. Nevertheless, in our two studies, more than a half of foods
captured by the recommender system were not defined in the database of hand-coded prompts. Thus, the two methods of prompting
could potentially complete each other at least when the system has
been deployed for a new population and there is no representative
data for training the recommender system yet.

4.2

relevant foods. Similarly, when respondents accepted prompts, we
have no evidence that they actually consumed those foods. In the
future, meals reported by participants could be verified against
direct observations.

5

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we aimed to improve methods used in online dietary
surveying to assist respondent’s memory and improve the accuracy
of dietary assessment. We designed a recommender system that
prompts about foods potentially omitted by respondents during
a dietary survey as an alternative to prompts hand-coded by nutritionists and dietitians [25]. In contrast to other contexts, where
recommender systems are used (e.g. online retail, entertainment),
dietary assessment systems are limited in their ability to collect
enough data for each individual user to build a model of their
personal preferences. For that reason, the recommender system
described in this paper mines a model of eating behavior of a population from data collected in previous dietary surveys. To validate
associated food prompts generated by the recommender system we
compared their performance to prompts that were hand-coded by
nutritionists in two online dietary assessment surveys. The validation demonstrated the ability of the recommender system to capture
significantly larger number of foods omitted by a respondent per recall than that by the hand-coded prompts. Moreover, the number of
distinct foods accepted by respondents from the generated prompts
was at least twice higher than that from the hand-coded prompts
in both surveys. That indicates that more than a half of omitted
foods captured by the recommender system were not foreseen by
nutritionists. In the meantime, to ensure that a dataset that is used
for training the recommender system contains associations of foods
commonly omitted by respondents it should be collected in surveys
assisted by prompts hand-coded by professionals with nutritional
background. Judging by the average time it took respondents of
both surveys to complete their recalls we observed no difference in
complexity of completing a survey with the two prompting methods. At the same time, considerably low precision of generated
prompts indicates an opportunity to further improve the relevance
of recommendations produced by the system. The results produced
in this paper indicate the effectiveness of using the recommender
system over hand-coded rules in online dietary assessment surveys,
where there is a rich dataset of past surveys for training the system.

Limitations

The current studies involved a relatively small number of participants, and the recruitment method used in the first study meant
that the demographics profile of our respondents was limited which
may limit the applicability of the results. Furthermore, in the second
study, participants were members of a weight loss campaign which
may imply that they are more health-conscious than the general
population. Finally, the age and gender distribution of participants
was not balanced in both studies. Thus, further research needed to
validate our findings using a wider range and balanced distribution
of demographical backgrounds.
In the first survey participants did not submit recalls for Friday
and weekend days, when people commonly consume more energy
and diet is less structured than on the week days. That is somewhat
addressed in the second survey that included weekends. However,
in the second survey participants could submit their meals at any
time of a day, which contradicts with the original multiple pass
24-hour recall method, where participants are asked to record their
meals in the morning. To address these concerns a similar study
should follow the procedure of the 24-hour recall method offering
respondents to complete their recalls for three non-consecutive
work days and on one day over the weekend.
Lastly, in both studies, in cases when participants rejected food
prompts, it was not possible to verify whether they genuinely reported all foods, ignored prompts or prompts did not contain any

REFERENCES
[1] 2018. Newcastle Can. https://www.newcastlecan.com/ . Archived at: http://www.
webcitation.org/744EwYZYM. Accessed: 2018-11-20.
[2] 2019.
What should my daily intake of calories be?
https://www.nhs.uk/common-health-questions/food-and-diet/
what-should-my-daily-intake-of-calories-be/
.
Archived
at:
http:
//www.webcitation.org/76rgYeqgK. Accessed: 2019-03-14.
[3] Ziad Ahmad, Marc Bosch, Nitin Khanna, Deborah A Kerr, Carol J Boushey,
Fengqing Zhu, and Edward J Delp. 2016. A mobile food record for integrated dietary assessment. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multimedia
Assisted Dietary Management. ACM, 53–62.
[4] Lenore Arab. 2003. Biomarkers of fat and fatty acid intake. The Journal of nutrition
133, 3 (2003), 925S–932S.
[5] Sheila A Bingham. 2002. Biomarkers in nutritional epidemiology. Public health
nutrition 5, 6a (2002), 821–827.
[6] Jennifer Bradley, Emma Simpson, Ivan Poliakov, John NS Matthews, Patrick
Olivier, Ashley J Adamson, and Emma Foster. 2016. Comparison of INTAKE24
(an online 24-h dietary recall tool) with interviewer-led 24-h recall in 11–24
year-old. Nutrients 8, 6 (2016), 358.
7

[32] Amy F. Subar, Sharon I. Kirkpatrick, Beth Mittl, Thea Palmer Zimmerman,
Frances E. Thompson, Christopher Bingley, Gordon Willis, Noemi G Islam,
Tom Baranowski, Suzanne McNutt, and Nancy Potischman. 2012. The Automated Self-Administered 24-Hour Dietary Recall (ASA24): A Resource for
Researchers, Clinicians and Educators from the National Cancer Institute. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 112, 8 (2012), 1134–1137. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2012.04.016
[33] Frances E Thompson, Amy F Subar, Catherine M Loria, Jill L Reedy, and Tom
Baranowski. 2010. Need for technological innovation in dietary assessment.
Journal of the American Dietetic Association 110, 1 (2010), 48–51.
[34] Alexander JAM Van Deursen and Jan AGM Van Dijk. 2009. Using the Internet:
Skill related problems in usersâĂŹ online behavior. Interacting with computers
21, 5-6 (2009), 393–402.
[35] Fengqing Zhu, Marc Bosch, Nitin Khanna, Carol J Boushey, and Edward J Delp.
2015. Multiple hypotheses image segmentation and classification with application
to dietary assessment. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 19, 1
(2015), 377–388.
[36] Krystle Zuniga and E McAuley. 2015. Considerations in selection of diet assessment methods for examining the effect of nutrition on cognition. The journal of
nutrition, health & aging 19, 3 (2015), 333–340.

[7] Chris Burges, Tal Shaked, Erin Renshaw, Ari Lazier, Matt Deeds, Nicole Hamilton,
and Greg Hullender. 2005. Learning to rank using gradient descent. In Proceedings
of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning. ACM, 89–96.
[8] Tracy L Burrows, Rebecca J Martin, and Clare E Collins. 2010. A systematic review
of the validity of dietary assessment methods in children when compared with
the method of doubly labeled water. Journal of the American Dietetic Association
110, 10 (2010), 1501–1510.
[9] Michelle C Carter, Salwa A Albar, Michelle A Morris, Umme Z Mulla, Neil Hancock, Charlotte E Evans, Nisreen A Alwan, Darren C Greenwood, Laura J Hardie,
Gary S Frost, et al. 2015. Development of a UK online 24-h dietary assessment tool:
Myfood24. Nutrients 7, 6 (2015), 4016–4032. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu7064016
[10] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. 2016. Deep neural networks
for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems. ACM, 191–198.
[11] William DuMouchel and Daryl Pregibon. 2001. Empirical bayes screening for
multi-item associations. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 67–76.
[12] E Foster, A Hawkins, E Stamp, and AJ Adamson. 2010. Development and validation of an interactive portion size assessment system (IPSAS). Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society 69, OCE6 (2010).
[13] Luke Gemming, Jennifer Utter, and Cliona Ni Mhurchu. 2015. Image-assisted
dietary assessment: a systematic review of the evidence. Journal of the Academy
of Nutrition and Dietetics 115, 1 (2015), 64–77.
[14] PM Guenther, TJ DeMaio, LA Ingwersen, and M Berlin. 1996. The multiple-pass
approach for the 24-hour recall in the Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by
Individuals (CSFII) 1994-96. In FASEB JOURNAL, Vol. 10. FEDERATION AMER
SOC EXP BIOL 9650 ROCKVILLE PIKE, BETHESDA, MD 20814-3998, 1142–1142.
[15] James R Hebert, Lynn Clemow, Lori Pbert, Ira S Ockene, and Judith K Ockene.
1995. Social desirability bias in dietary self-report may compromise the validity
of dietary intake measures. International journal of epidemiology 24, 2 (1995),
389–398.
[16] Rachel K. Johnson. 2002. Dietary Intake-How Do We Measure What People Are
Really Eating? Obesity 10, S11 (2002), 63S–68S. https://doi.org/10.1038/oby.2002.
192
[17] Haik Kalantarian, Nabil Alshurafa, and Majid Sarrafzadeh. 2017. A survey of diet
monitoring technology. IEEE Pervasive Computing 16, 1 (2017), 57–65.
[18] Alan R Kristal, Ulrike Peters, and John D Potter. 2005. Is it time to abandon the
food frequency questionnaire?
[19] Xuan Nhat Lam, Thuc Vu, Trong Duc Le, and Anh Duc Duong. 2008. Addressing
cold-start problem in recommendation systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Ubiquitous information management and communication.
ACM, 208–211.
[20] Greg Linden, Brent Smith, and Jeremy York. 2003. Amazon.com recommendations:
Item-to-item collaborative filtering. IEEE Internet computing 1 (2003), 76–80.
[21] Chang Liu, Yu Cao, Yan Luo, Guanling Chen, Vinod Vokkarane, and Yunsheng
Ma. 2016. Deepfood: Deep learning-based food image recognition for computeraided dietary assessment. In International Conference on Smart Homes and Health
Telematics. Springer, 37–48.
[22] M Barbara E Livingstone and Alison E Black. 2003. Markers of the validity of
reported energy intake. The Journal of nutrition 133, 3 (2003), 895S–920S.
[23] TS Lopes, RR Luiz, DJ Hoffman, E Ferriolli, K Pfrimer, AS Moura, R Sichieri, and
RA Pereira. 2016. Misreport of energy intake assessed with food records and 24-h
recalls compared with total energy expenditure estimated with DLW. European
journal of clinical nutrition 70, 11 (2016), 1259.
[24] Jennie Macdiarmid and John Blundell. 1998. Assessing dietary intake: Who, what
and why of under-reporting. Nutrition research reviews 11, 2 (1998), 231–253.
https://doi.org/10.1079/NRR19980017
[25] Timur Osadchiy, Ivan Poliakov, Patrick Olivier, Maisie Rowland, and Emma Foster.
2019. Recommender system based on pairwise association rules. Expert Systems
with Applications 115 (2019), 535–542.
[26] Nancy Potischman. 2003. Biologic and methodologic issues for nutritional
biomarkers. The Journal of nutrition 133, 3 (2003), 875S–880S.
[27] Suzanne M Rebro, Ruth E Patterson, Alan R Kristal, and Carrie L Cheney. 1998.
The effect of keeping food records on eating patterns. Journal of the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics 98, 10 (1998), 1163.
[28] Maayan Roth, Assaf Ben-David, David Deutscher, Guy Flysher, Ilan Horn, Ari
Leichtberg, Naty Leiser, Yossi Matias, and Ron Merom. 2010. Suggesting friends
using the implicit social graph. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 233–242.
[29] Maisie Rowland, Ivan Poliakov, Shanna Christie, Emma Simpson, and Emma
Foster. 2016. Field testing of the use of INTAKE24 in a sample of young people
and adults living in Scotland. (2016).
[30] Jee-Seon Shim, Kyungwon Oh, and Hyeon Chang Kim. 2014. Dietary assessment
methods in epidemiologic studies. Epidemiology and Health (2014). https:
//doi.org/10.4178/epih/e2014009 arXiv:e2014009
[31] Emma Simpson, Jennifer Bradley, Ivan Poliakov, Dan Jackson, Patrick Olivier,
Ashley J Adamson, and Emma Foster. 2017. Iterative development of an online
dietary recall tool: INTAKE24. Nutrients 9, 2 (2017), 118.
8

